\chapter{Writing new implementations}

\section{Introduction}

In general, we advise against the \texttt{:use} of packages other than
the \texttt{common-lisp} package.  For that reason, in the remainder
of this chapter, we use explicit package prefixes to make it clear
what symbols are referred to.

\section{Writing new line implementations}

\subsection{Package}

It is generally a good idea to define a new package for a new
implementation of the concept of a line.  For the remainder of this
section, we use the name \texttt{new-line} for this package.

\subsection{Classes}

A class that is a subclass of \texttt{cluffer:line} must be provided.
In the remainder of this section we refer to this class as
\texttt{new-line:line}.

It is not mandatory to provide any implementation of the \emph{cursor}
abstraction, but if such an abstraction is provided, it is recommended
that the root class of all cursor classes be a subclass of
\texttt{cluffer:cursor}.  In the remainder of this section we refer to
this class as \texttt{new-line:cursor}.

Both the \emph{standard line}
\seesec{sec-implementation-standard-line} and the \emph{simple line}
\seesec{sec-implementation-simple-line} provide two kinds of cursor
abstractions, namely \emph{left-sticky} cursors and
\emph{right-sticky} cursors.  If the new implementation provides
different kinds of cursors, the different behavior can be accomplished
either by subclassing as is done in both provided implementations, or
it can be accomplished by some other means such as storing additional
information in slots of the root class.

\subsection{Methods}

\Defmethod {item-count} {(line \texttt{new-line:line})}

This method should return the number of items in \textit{line}.

If the new implementation defines subclasses of \texttt{new-line:line}
for which the item count is computed differently, as is the case for
the standard line \seesec{sec-implementation-standard-line} then this
method must be replaced by a method for each subclass with a specific
way of computing the item count.

\Defmethod {item-at-position} {(line \texttt{new-line:line}) position}

This method should return the item at \textit{position} in \textit{line}.

There is no need to check that \textit{position} is a valid item
position in \textit{line}.  This check is already taken care of by an
auxiliary method on \texttt{item-at-position} specialized to
\texttt{cluffer:line}.

As with \texttt{item-count}, if the new implementation defines
subclasses of the root class \texttt{new-line:line} for which the item
at a particular position is computed differently, as is the case for
the standard line \seesec{sec-implementation-standard-line} then this
method must be replaced by a method for each subclass with a specific
way of computing the item count.

\Defmethod {insert-item-at-position} {(line \texttt{new-line:line}) item position}

This method should insert \textit{item} at \textit{position} in
\textit{line}.

There is no need to check that \textit{position} is a valid insertion
position in \textit{line}.  This check is already taken care of by an
auxiliary method on the generic function
\texttt{insert-item-at-position} specialized to \texttt{cluffer:line}.

\Defmethod {delete-item-at-position} {(line \texttt{new-line:line}) position}

This method should delete the item at \textit{position} in \textit{line}.

There is no need to check that \textit{position} is a valid item
position in \textit{line}.  This check is already taken care of by an
auxiliary method on the generic function
\texttt{delete-item-at-position} specialized to \texttt{cluffer:line}.

\Defmethod {items} {(line \texttt{new-line:line})}

This method should return all the items in \textit{line}.

The generic function \texttt{items} is typically not called by
implementations of the buffer protocol; only by client code.
Therefore, the data type used to return the items is a matter between
the line implementation and the application.  Both the simple line
\seesec{sec-implementation-simple-line} and the standard line
\seesec{sec-implementation-standard-line} return the items as a simple
vector.  For applications that allow only character items, it might be
a good idea to return the contents as a string instead.

It is even possible to omit this method altogether, since it is always
possible for client code to obtain the items of a line by calling the
generic function \texttt{item-at-position} for each possible position
of the line.

\section{Writing new buffer implementations}

